---
layout: post
author: Mordecai
title: "Capitalist Survivor's Guilt"
date: Mon, 2 Aug 2021 06:23:23 +0100
categories: post
---

Recently, I got a new job, with an impossible to ignore raise attached to it. My
net compensation about doubled, and I was not exactly uncomfortable before. And
after the intial jubilant feeling had worn off, I was left
feeling... guilty. And ashamed. And I was very confused as to why.

I grew up rather poor. My mom, being the force of nature she is, raised me while
working, on a blue collar salary. I was sent to eat with my grandparents
frequently towards the end of the month, in the early years. This was one of
many sources of family-internal politicking that made sure I knew that a lot of
things were always conditional and anything nice would also be held against you
later. This got better later, and we ended up being relatively comfortable. Food
was stable, small luxuries possible, the grandparents removed from the picture.

To name numbers, my total compensation–this being local to Germany–went from
65.000€ gross per year, to 125.000€-131.000€ gross per year, depending on what
the stock grant evaluates to at any given time. If I exclude stock grant and
bonus, and merely use the fixed salary I am paid (85.000€ gross per year),
according to [a study I found][study], this puts me in the 96th percentile in
Germany, and removes me more than 250% from the median German income, according
to [this calculator][calc]. My salary raise, despite being only half of my total
raise, ended up being more than I pay for rent and utilties per month, despite
living in a 2 bedroom, new construction apartment in Berlin. If I do pull in
stock grant and bonus, I'm a 1-percenter. It comes out to an absurd 6.864€ per
month, net. I have reason to believe that this is nowhere close to the top of
the ladder, and that my income will grow further, from ridiculous to
obscene. There's entire levels above me in the career ladder, and I started
barely in the middle.

I have barely got my first paycheque and the effects are already tangible. I
have been able to shortcut the strained public mental health system in Berlin by
self-paying for the private system, and just eating the costs of 100€ per
session. Given what we know about the modern precariat and how tightly most
people live these days, that's an absurd luxury. I went to visit friends in
Ireland this weekend, on a whim. We ate out for every meal, picking restaurants
and activities based on what seemed interesting at the time. Two days before
leaving we decided to spend the first night in a hotel in Dublin, so we also
booked that. All this did was about half the amount of money I can save this
month.

I'm proud of where I am now, I did this not by some stroke of luck that has
nothing to do with me, but by being good at what I do and good at marketing
myself for what I do. I want to be seen as successful, as good at what I do, I
seek status as a social animal. But in achieving this, I'm facing problems and
questions I don't know how to get the answer to. Yet, this is very complicated
to talk about. One only needs to turn to the recent QC twitter drama that [even
reached regular news sites][qc-link] to know that complaining about wealth and
its effects are considered an impressive failure of empathy. And, I understand
that. I was there myself. Someone complaining about the negative effects of
wealth when I was visiting my grandparents three times per week for meals would
have seemed utterly absurd. So, let's talk about the downsides and quandries I'm
facing.

Every single norm of what I knew that counted as a luxury growing up, minor or
major, is completely unmoored now. Eating out used to be a treat, something that
happened for birthdays and occasions. I can now order food or eat out twice per
week without needing to re-allocate money. The jubilant feeling of not needing
to cook has vanished completely. What constitutes a luxury now? I'm not sure. I
think its replacement will be travel, like my Ireland trip. This comes with its
own implications of the ethics of travel in the time of global warming and the
growing awareness that we are in [Finding Out Century][finding-out-twitter]
makes this feel tainted in a sense, and not something I want to grow accustomed
to.

Growing up poor gives you a sense of acceptable conduct, of what is good and
polite. This set of norms is completely irrelevant now. Previously, I would
never have had a long-standing social debt, like someone inviting me to
dinner. The costs would have been precisely accounted for and split equally, or
with minor bias for effort. Money was tight for everyone, being unable to recoup
expenditures from people delaying paying you back threw everything out of
balance. Now, nobody keeps precise track. Expenses are accounted for in a rough,
"You invited me last time so this tab is mine" sense of equality. While I
may have grokked that bit, everything else in terms of conduct has become
irrelevant, I have no idea where to re-learn. How do you learn the standards of
a new socioeconomic class, if not for painful and embarrassing trial and error?
How do you not constantly betray being nouveau-riche?

Previously, my ambitions were reducible to money, the things I wanted and needed
most, I could buy. That is still sort of the case (for example, an owned home
instead of renting), but for the most part, this has also become
irrelevant. I have climbed a rung in Maslow's hierachy. What do I replace my
previous ambitions with? I don't know yet. I haven't found out yet. I'm not sure
how I'm going to find out, given that the entire idea of having desires is still
relatively new to me for a variety of reasons.

I could run away from all of these problems. Live in the same way I did before,
and squirrel away most of my money. Change nothing, buy a house, continue to
change little, retire comfortably. This is likely a stronger version of what I
will do. Take care of myself, take care of those I love. Try to not have
everything change in a few years. I have enough change to feel tired about,
enough new things to discover about myself. But it also would be nice to learn
literacy in a new class of people I could now make friends with, learning how to
deal with people that grew up here, and while I will never be one of them, I'd
like to not feel alienated.

I feel guilty about writing this. Everything in this post sounds braggadocious
to me. It's gauche to speak about money, it's more gauche to complain about
having it. I know what it's like to not have it, I should be more grateful than
I am. Yet, the feeling of alienation and unmooring of where I grew up in is hard
to shake. I'm tired, and feel alone. In a sense, I understand where QC is coming
from.

[study]: https://www.iwkoeln.de/studien/judith-niehues-maximilian-stockhausen-einkommensverteilung-nach-soziooekonomischen-teilgruppen-437725.html
[calc]: https://www.iwkoeln.de/presse/multimedia/judith-niehues-wie-arm-oder-reich-waeren-sie-in-anderen-laendern-europas.html
[qc-link]: https://www.newsweek.com/twitter-thread-about-acid-trip-sparks-internet-backlash-1610675
[finding-out-twitter]: https://twitter.com/merman_melville/status/1364000670760669184?lang=en
