---
layout: post
author: Mordecai
title: "Taking Advantage Of Being Medicated: Revising Pre-Medication Processes."
---

Recently, I've been forced to consider precisely *how* I do things, how I work
and how I do what I want to, and what is expected of me. A lot of assumptions
about how I work and how I can do well have been trained and engrained for
decades at this point, and they essentially all became obsolete to varying
degrees once medication was officially administered.

Yet, I haven't really changed how I do things based on this obsoletion. A lot of
things I still do now exactly as I did them before medication was available to
me. The process still revolves around externalising everything, factorising and
decomposing the projects into small slivers of discrete action to be done at a
point separate than the planning. I've not taken into account how medication
changes the asssumptions those ways were built on.

After some mulling about how I would precisely describe the impact of medication
on my wellbeing, I arrived at a model: Medication lets me do better with less
effort. In a graph, I'd roughly express the probability of a project succeeding
against the amount of effort invested in the project like this:

![Graph along the axes of "Effort invested" and "probability of success". The
curve of being medicated is significantly steeper than the unmedicated curve,
allowing for higher probability of success with less effort.]({{
"/assets/adhd-curve/medication_curve.png" | relative_url }})

Now, the low probability of any project being completed successfully at low
effort-levels is not practical or acceptable for daily life. The answer, at
least for me, was found in using process, and tools to remove the
low-probability-part by force. Everything got decomposed and split into tiny
chunks, written down elsewhere and tracaked. This is to say, the processes made
sure that a certain level of effort is invested in *everything that needed to be
done by me*, so that the bottom for successrate is at least acceptable:

![The same graph, but with the first, low-effort-invested part greyed out, as
the habits and processes taught by ADHD enforce a certain success rate by always
investing a base minimum of effort.]({{
"/assets/adhd-curve/curve_with_habits.png" | relative_url }})

Not only is this a very tiring way to go through life, it also removes a large
part of the benefits of medication, while leaving all of their problems intact.
The processes, strategies, habits have to be re-thought and re-engineered, from
ground up, as the assumptions and context for which they were designed no longer
holds water. A *lot* of energy is wasted by overprocessing.

This is, to put it mildly, daunting. These are the processes that have kept me
alive for decades, allowing me to function and to thrive as much as I did. I
have more than a few engrained pieces of muscle memory regarding workflow,
kneejerk and trained automations on a cognitive level. But all of them together
significantly reduce the benefit that I get from being medicated, and the
opportunity cost is significant.

The differences in behaviours, the things that have in fact changed, lay the
groundwork for where I should go first for changes to existing processes:

- It is no longer straight-up impossible to go from "deciding on doing
  something" to "doing it" immediately. Previously, before medication, this
  required a pause, as "deciding on what to do" was considered a step, and this
  created a barrier to the next action.
- I have a larger "working memory", I can remember contexts and facts that
  aren't immediately in-context. This means I have to externalise less, and can
  rely on having a reasonable memory. What this means, and where the boundaries
  are of this, I will have to explore.
- Sustained focus is now possible, meaning I no longer have to decompose
  everything to minute-long slices, and I can use larger chunks as process
  input. This makes planning considerably less tiring, and planning a day
  easier. The mental barrier of "oh that looks too large to do" remains, and
  will have to be carefully eroded.
- Sustained focus also means that activities I previously had aversions to are
  now possible, and I need to re-examine that entire list. People who have
  followed me for some time on Twitter will note that my reading sharply
  increased (from zero to not-zero) when I gained access to medication.
- Spontaneity is now no-longer day-ruining. I combatted lack of executive
  function with careful planning and precise habits, this resulted in brittle,
  but functioning processes. I now can spontaneously do things without planning
  them before to grueling detail, something that previously would throw off my
  entire day.

On the other hand, it does not mean that all habits and processes are now
_actually_ obsolete. I still get incredible mileage out of my project
planning/task management systems, but now they are "merely" beneficial instead
of absolutely necessary.

It boils down to the same decision as always: Adapt to the new context, or risk
eating larger and larger opportunity cost. So, in this vein, adaptation. Time to
see how the new, changed, mental landscape looks.
