---
layout: post
author: Mordecai
title: "Authoritarian High Modernism Of The Self"
categories: post
---

Author James C. Scott, in his very well-known book, _Seeing Like A State_[^1],
introduces the concept of "authoritarian high modernism" to explain common
threads between various ideas and schemes that were supposed to make life
better, but ended up doing just the opposite. High Modernism is his term for the
deep belief that society and people can be made better by thorough application
of science and reason, that once we embrace the insights brought to us by
empiricism, the scientific method, and technological progress, suffering on a
societal level will greatly diminish, if not vanish entirely. However, some may
resist the noble quest towards progress, towards a society without suffering,
and stick to their old ways. But if we want to raise everyone up from their
misery, force will be needed, and those stuck in their ways will thank us later.
This is the authoritarian part.

You can see already how this can (and did) go severely wrong. What was supposed
to be objective good, proven by science and brought forth by the state, was in
fact neither objective, nor good. To give a concrete example, agrarian reforms
failed, and millions starved, because the plans for them were cooked up in a
Chicago hotel bedroom[^2], and failed to account for much of the reality on the
ground. Plans and ideas, schematics and processes that had been vetted
thoroughly in... an environment entirely different from where it was supposed to
be applied. With violated assumptions, a plan that barely worked to begin with
stopped working entirely. Many, many people starved in the process of
collectivisation.

But whenever this inconvenient truth was pointed out to those that had put
together the plan of collectivisation, the fault was instead pushed to those
working on the collectivised farms. The plan was correct, but the execution was
the downfall. If only they did things right, followed the genius plan, then
nobody would starve and everyone would get to share the fruits of an ideal,
science-driven and empirically tested society. But until they would see that,
they would have to be forced to do what they needed to do. And so, even the seed
grain was confiscated, as those on the farms were 'hiding' the outputs they were
supposed to send back (because, you see, the plan worked all along).

And this is, in my opinion, the greatest fault of authoritarian high modernism.
It is so damned *certain* of what is the right thing to do, even when that is in
flat contradiction to what is happening, and what they can see happening. They
have arrived at The Truth™, and now that they have found what is true, only what
is untrue and irrelevant remains.

Anyways, I think I may have been subjecting myself to an analogue of this, just
instead of millions of people being affected, it's myself, doing much the same
to also myself.

When you mostly work with your head, trying to piece together how certain things
behave and change over time, optimising processes and their applications, it's
not a big leap to also apply a similar process to yourself, as another process
and application to optimise. You figure out that there are some ways of doing
things that are better than others, you remove the less effective ones, and have
gained a bunch of resources and time. You make a plan for how to prepare for a
party, and you execute that. The making of the plan took a bunch of work off
your shoulders in remembering and accounting for various problems.

This leads to two things, one is more energy and free time (because you're doing
less work, because you are using more effective processes) and the other is an
increased belief in the process as being good and leading to good outcomes.
After all, the empirical method is on your side here. You tried something, the
results were good, you tried more of it, the results continued to be good.

The continued build-up of belief that various processes of planning and
execution leads in part, to tool fetishisation, where people are much less
focused on what they originally intended to do with these tools (accomplish
concrete goals), and instead focus more on the tools themselves. In the past
this has been affectionately labelled "productivity pr0n"[^3], today that more
takes forms of people spending endless amounts of time customising their
Personal Knowledge Bases™ and writing about the practices of note-taking over
actually doing much with them.

The free time and energy that is saved by use of more effective processes is, of
course, in part used to accomplish more of the things we want to accomplish.
This leads, ideally and partially, to an increased enjoyment of life. Probably
more social recognition, maybe more monetary means. This, again, reinforces the
notion that this meta-process of treating oneself as a process to be optimised
is a *good* idea, it has brought you all of this extra time and energy you can
now use to do more projects and realise more ideas!

Until something, for some reason, causes a drop in your energy levels. Maybe you
got sick, maybe the seasons changed and your sleep is worse, maybe a
relationship isn't going super well and it sits in your head, maybe you suffer
from depression. The execution of plans becomes harder, but remains doable. The
application of new tools and processes has stopped providing big leaps and
improvements, as their adaptation costs energy and the differences are no longer
as big as "no tools" to "a decent tool". Life becomes more strenuous. While
improved processes minus less energy averages out to approximately the
before-tools state, there are now more projects. You fight through, and end up
coping alright.

If there is now the misfortune of energy or time levels dropping further, things
start getting a bit dicey. With a sudden loss of free time, that's something
where you can adjust for it, mentally: You see that there is now a bunch of time
taken up on your calendar, and obviously you can't do things then, so
proportionally reduced output is to be expected.[^4] Energy drops are more
tricky, in that they have less objective traces. You just kinda feel worse.

When that change is large enough, there is now a problem. We have, on the one
hand, the process we know is good. We have tried and succeeded in plenty of
projects using the process. On the other hand, we have declining results.
Depending on how hard you believe in the importance of tools and process[^5],
and good you are at self-reflection and introspection, you can either come to
the conclusion that, #1, there is something you missed, because what used to add
up isn't anymore, or #2, that if you just executed the plan *better*, the
problems would go away.

In my anecdotal experience, people that have arrived at "tools and processes are
important and considerable time should be invested into them", and also "applying
those to myself is a good thing", rarely end up at option #1. Instead, a common
thread tends to be that we are somehow lying to ourselves about what we can and
can't do, about what we should be able to do. Plans thrown together quickly are
assumed to be good, because the plans were always good.[^6] Instead we are the
problem, our execution is the problem. We are certain of what's correct and
true, so whatever's left must contain the problem. Unfortunately, what's left
and contains the problem is ourselves.

In the quest for making the tools work through execution, we optimise further,
and frequently, we optimise the joy and fun out of execution. Much like a city
isn't a tree[^7], a human isn't a computer that doesn't mind having unnecessary
tasks removed. In our quest for output, we often force ourselves to act like
computers, and end up miserable, and still feeling guilty and ashamed that we
aren't doing 'enough'.

That is, in a nutshell, what I think I've been doing to myself, in at least
parts. I used to be far worse about it, but still, even the reduced form of it
has left its marks, and I'm tired. Yet, my lists for today show me that I still
need to make dinner, because I need to eat, and prepare the flat for tomorrow,
where I will go back to work and optimise processes and applications.

---

[^1]: It is also a very good book.

[^2]: I learned of this story originally through _Seeing Like A State_, though
    in googling a better citation I found [_Every Farm A Factory_][efaf] from
    Deborah Fitzgerald, it looks *fascinating*, and has instantly wandered on my
    reading list.

[^3]: Which I was also caught in for a long while. I even had the stack of 50
    paper folders at a time when that really didn't help me much. But it did
    bring me joy when that was also scarce, so it was not exactly a complete
    loss, albeit for unintended reasons.

[^4]: There's another trap here, in that the expectation is for *proportionally*
    reduced output. More often than not, something that unexpectedly squats a
    bunch of your free time is also very draining, leading to energy levels in
    the remaining free time to crater as well.

[^5]: I, for one, believe that tools and processes are incredibly important.
    But, having ADHD, my brain isn't much good *without* tools and processes, so
    I expect my judgement to be a bit warped.

[^6]: Here's another fun parallel. In many examples of Scott's book, the pilot
    studies worked. But they worked because they were being *made to work* by
    the people on the ground, because testing the idea behind the project
    stopped being relevant, compared to reporting good results to the person
    that controlled your life's trajectory. People on the ground of these pilot
    projects adopted the flawed plan to the local environment as best they
    could, often using far more resources than the actual plan foresaw for the
    returns. In the personal angle, you can make any plan work by using more
    energy on them than they are worth, but end result is what sticks with you:
    Making a plan worked, let's do more of that. No matter if it wouldn't have
    worked under normal circumstances.

[^7]: This is a very good, rather short paper by Christopher Alexander that I
    highly recommend reading. Here's a [PDF][not-a-tree].

[efaf]: https://www.degruyter.com/document/doi/10.12987/9780300133417/html
[not-a-tree]: http://en.bp.ntu.edu.tw/wp-content/uploads/2011/12/06-Alexander-A-city-is-not-a-tree.pdf
