---
layout: post
author: Mordecai
title: "Music As Engineering Mindset Antidote"
categories: post
---

A few months back, I picked up drum machine, a relatively cheap [DrumBrute
Impact](https://www.arturia.com/products/hardware-synths/drumbrute-impact/overview)
from Arturia. I did so on a lark, because I had many friends continously go on
about how much fun synthesizers are, and I figured, eh, why not. Over the last
few months that has been a hobby I've drifted deeper into and have had a rather
unexpected updside from: a reprieve and alleviation of what I'd call the
engineer's disease.

## The Engineering Mindset Or Thought Disease

The core element of engineering can be summed up as 'constrained
problem-solving'. You have the problem to be solved, but that solution is placed
under multiple constraints in many different ways. Usually at least cost, often
also space and time. It's not entirely about merely solving the problem in an
effective way, but doing so in a way that breaks none of the (usually at least
partially arbitrary) constraints you were given. A bridge that may not cost more
than this much, take this long to build, must consist of these materials and be
done by this date, and should also be the best bridge possible under those
constraints.

The 'disease' bit comes from the detail that 'constrained problem-solving'
describes an *awful lot of every-day life*. You do constrained problem-solving
at basically any point in the day, in some form, buying groceries, planning to
hang out with your friends, buying cinema tickets.

This view propagates from projects are very clearly 'engineering' (drafting
plans for bridges and building software) to everywhere else in life. The finding
of constraints and goals as main point of view becomes natural, a grocery run is
analysed in terms of what you must buy and what you absolutely need, and then
optimised for being cheap and being quick to do. Shelves are analysed for
storage space and cost, ease of sourcing and relative consistency, ease of
assembly and so on, purely functional characteristics are often put front and
center.

What is often optimised out is the *personal expression*, the desire to do
things differently just because it is pleasing to do so, either because you
enjoy the process or the aesthetics or the end result being a certain way. In
another word, what is often optimised and engineered out is *art*. When it is
explicitly included as goal, it is often first to go, as it is the most
subjective and the most variable in terms of costs. This is fine in a
professional context, the average bridge does not need to win design awards and
the average grocery-trip need not be a dance choreography. Again, the issue
comes from scale: When everything you do is seen at least a bit as an
engineering project, and is approached like an engineering project, then art is
optimised out in everything you do, at least a little bit.

This is... dull. Or, at least, dulling. Art and self-expression are not things
that people should disqualify themselves from, that tends to come at great
cost in a way I can't exactly qualify and point out.[^1] All work and no play
makes Jack a dull boy, and all that.

## Music As Antidote To The Engineering Mindset

Music in its common form and impression has the same problem anything that
mainly is done by specialised professionals has: it looks entirely
unapproachable. You know how popular music *sounds*, but you probably do not
have a single clue as to how to approach making anything like it. This, again,
is a prompt for the engineering mindset, there's a goal and some constraints.
Not least because of this I decided to give it a try, and here's where the
surprising bit happens.

There is no success criteria for making music. Or, well, there is one, but it is
that *you*, the person making it, like what you're hearing.

Sure, you can tie it to external forms of success, but that comes down the line.
With most crafts, you can check your work. Your woodworking join either fits, or
it does not. Your cake either rises and looks like the recipe picture, or it
does not. Your seam holds, or it does not.

With music, and other forms of artistic expression? All you have is whether
*you* like it or not, as a check on whether to proceed down this lane.

Similarly, it is different from other forms of artistic pursuit that also have a
similar lack of constraints, in that it is relatively difficult to directly
'fail' - in painting or drawing, it is fairly obvious if your artwork looks like
the object you intended, or not. Music does not quite work that way. There can
and will be a discrepancy between what you tried to make and what you made, but
it's less obvious and less destructive to the overall effect than in other
artistic media. More often than not your failure to do what you intended will
result in happy accidents that are still _good_, just not what you intended them
to be.

The same lack of immediate, overt failure also makes it more amenable to
external support. An concrete, 'classical' instrument has a hard requirement for
skill to make something musical, but creating music is uniquely amenable to
having technology help. If you have instrument-skill troubles, a DAW with MIDI
sequencing still allows you to create music.[^3] If you, for example, 'merely'
have trouble with keeping rhythm, quantisation will help you and move things
played too fast or too slow to the right place. Piano rolls and modern DAWs help
you iterate and move things to the right place without being immediately
roadblocked by your own skill, or encountering the "must be this good to have
fun" wall.

It is also uniquely accessible for an artform: nearly everything is
accomplishable inside of a modern, average laptop. While actual hardware
synthesizers tend to be prohibitively expensive and space-consuming, on a purely
results level, a laptop can fill in for nearly everything else. The ubiquity of
piracy in the music software space also removes the other entry barriers:
dedicated instruments and gear.[^2]

In this vein, I would anyone that feels some kind of way about what I'd call
engineer's disease to give making music a shot as a sort of self-therapy hobby.
It has a low barrier to entry, a limitless ceiling, and as long as you have fun
with any part of the process, a wonderful creative outlet.

## Postscript: Some Notes About Getting Started

Especially in the beginning, forget about songs and albums, and think much
smaller: 20-30 second loops and chunks. They can be put together much quickly,
allow you to explore and iterate faster.

And that, to me, is kind of the crux of it: If you don't like what you're
hearing, do something different. Pick a track you like a lot, and try to draw
some inspiration from it without copying it.

Some actual, concrete starting points: You'll want a Digital Audio Workstation,
or DAW. Nearly all the big ones have trials long enough to figure out if this is
something you'll want to put non-zero money into and buy a DAW, or non-zero
effort to figure out how to pirate it.

The most common ones I've seen used as of late are [Ableton
Live](https://www.ableton.com/en/live/), [FL
Studio](https://www.image-line.com/fl-studio/) and [Bitwig
Studio](https://www.bitwig.com/). Particularly if you have never done anything
in this area before, I'd say that Ableton and Bitwig are more streamlined and
have a more 'obvious' workflow. FL Studio is frequently described as a "toolbox"
and you can make your own workflow with what it has, but it will not point you
to adopt a happy path, as the other two do.

A lot of online content in this space is in video form, in part because it is
genuinely well-suited to this domain. My favorite channel here is [Benn
Jordan](https://www.youtube.com/@BennJordan), who's also a treasure trove of
inspiration.

---

[^1]: The best description for the consequences of doing that pervasively is
    that you become a passenger, someone along for the ride where your effective
    self-determination is ever-decreasing.

[^2]: This is not to say that hardware is pointless, only that it is optional -
    I personally love my dedicated hardware boxes, they make things much more
    immediate and visceral, and I highly recommend it, especially if you work in
    front of a (laptop) screen all day anyway. But, the key word is _optional_,
    and the laptop can fill in for whatever you do not want to, or can't,
    purchase in hardware.

[^3]: Of course, this assumes to some degree that your impetus for creating
    music is about the end product, and not the specific process of creating it,
    and that it is in some capacity comprised of digitally-generated sounds.
