---
layout: post
author: Mordecai
title: "Borrowing From The Safety Engineering Toolbox For Better Mental Health."
date: Sat, 30 Oct 2021 23:31:09 +0200
categories: post
---

I recently read _Engineering A Safer World_[^1] by Nancy Leveson[^2], and while
it is intended about how to make systems safe for the people running them, I
can't help but notice that so many of the tools, assumptions and structures
given hold up for the personal life, too. The benefit of the theory of the
really abstract (like systems theory is) is that you can apply it to a lot of
things. So, an application of systems theory to a personal life impeded by
mental illness and life in These Days.[^9]

## The definition of Safety in the context of running your own life.

Traditionally, *Safety* means that a system does not do harm to people. In the
system of yourself, operating in the world as it is today, it means not letting
*yourself* come to harm. The same techniques used for eliminating unacceptable
losses in complex systems hold for personal lives, seeing as you are a person in
a complex system: Society. This means we can steal a lot of tools that have been
developed with the urgency and importance of saving lives for saving our own.

Of course, if we consider society the system under scrutiny, we are not going to
get far, society at large is far outside of our influence. Instead, let us draw
a smaller boundary: One person's life, your own. There is considerable discourse over
whether or not one person's life is considered "controllable", but, in the
interest of time, let us settle for "you have some degree of influence over your
own life".

## Hazards

Now that we have a system under consideration, we can start applying from the
toolbox. First up, the identification of hazards.

A *hazard* is anything that, together with a certain set of other events,
produces an accident, a loss, something going wrong that you'd really rather
didn't. Some of these are always present but not helpful to include in a list
intended to mitigate the effects of the ones we can control most.[^11]

The things that fall into this for our interest, are what are typically
considered *symptoms* of something else, things like:

- Poor sleep or insomnia,
- Insufficient/bad/excessive eating,
- Substance-based coping, like alcohol, nicotine, weed, etc,[^12]
- Chronic fatigue,
- Ennui.

It should be pointed out that all these are not harmful or direct problems for
themselves. They tend to be harbingers, signs of other things. They may be not
fun to go through, not exactly wonderful to experience, but only in the most
extreme forms do they do acute harm by themselves. However, all of them open up
the possibility of things going more wrong than if they were not present. Lack
of sleep produces lapses in attention and cognitive capacity that can be mostly
fine, but deadly when combined with driving a car. Chronic fatigue is survivable
but degrades the joy you find in life, making other things most likely to land
worse, or cause spiralling.

This increased potential for things going wrong is why we want to keep an eye
out for them: If we can avoid these being present in our life, less things have
a possibility of causing an unacceptable loss, and so less things will go
acutely wrong.

## Incident Analyses

This is where the second part comes in, the *incident analyses*. That means,
you'll almost certainly remember situations, encounters, missed opportunities
that you wish had gone different. Fights you've had where you felt like an idiot
the entire way through because you were fighting tooth and nail for something
you didn't care about much in the first place. Health problems that arose from
coping mechanisms having harmful side effects. From these situations you can
then learn about your behaviour, how you react, what you do, how you see the
world, and how you prioritise.

The information and behaviours in these events is different (and therefore
useful) from what you know and assume about yourself. This is not the
hypothetical "this is what I think I'd do" set of behavioural trait an idealised
you exhibits, but in the "this actually happened" set of behaviours of the
tired, cranky and ill you that has to deal with life on a daily basis. This is
the person that others are talking to, and the person that forms your broader
context.

I find that some distance to this person actually helps, here. It's about having
empathy with someone, knowing only their external behaviours. We may be able to
see into our own head, but we can't do the same for a depressed friend. If we
want to account for how others react to us, we can't take our thoughts, intents
and wishes into account.

### An Aside About Managing Your Own Psychology

It should be noted here, that since we are so far looking exclusively at things
that have gone wrong here, and we see "things that actually happened" as a more
real version of how you prioritise, act, and decide in the moment than what you
tell yourself in the moment, this can and will clash sharply with your own
self-conception, of how you act. This can, and will, be painful. It's of
absolutely utmost importance that you do not beat yourself up about this, as
much as you can manage not to. Blame, judgement, and disciplinary 'punishment'
is absolutely antithetical to the entire process, and will make most of the
benefits of it vanish into a puff of misery, but more on this in a bit.

While this is an immensely useful toolbox, its usual (and common) focus on the
negative takes a large psychological toll and therefore has a sort of "you must
be this well to participate" barrier to entry.

You can and absolutely should apply the same techniques to things you think went
well, things that left you feeling warm and fuzzy on the inside. The result will
be the same, but with encouragement of the environmental circumstances rather
than management or avoidance.

The general guideline is, when something went very differently than you planned,
foresaw, or thought it would go, it makes for a great context to put into this
process. I would advise that if you are currently battling intense depression or
similarly intense illness to focus on the things that went better than expected.
There is just as much to learn there, about how you act and decide and
prioritise, and it won't make you feel worse about yourself, you've got plenty
of that to go around already.

## A Worked Example: A Fight With A Friend.

Consider now what happened in this specific interaction. Things did not go as
you planned: "I erupted at my friend and now they're hurt and I feel terrible".

There is the obvious first layer here: I erupted at my friend, that is bad and I
should never do this. In order to achieve this, you begin to view anger as
suspicious, frustration as suspicious, and tamp down on any displayed negative
emotions. This attempted fix for the situation has now made your life *worse*,
as you suppress your own emotions, in an attempt to correct for some emotions
sometimes being the problem. You view *yourself* as the problem, you blame
yourself, and you want to come up with elaborate mechanisms and tools to prevent
this from ever happening again.

Instead, I would encourage you to look at what needed to be present in order for
this to happen:

- You were feeling irritable and frustrated.
- You were talking to your friend.
- Your friend poked at something that you were feeling very self-conscious
  about.

It took all three of these factors to produce the situation, any combination of
two out of three would not have been sufficient, and would not have resulted in
the problem. Two of those involve things that your friend had nothing to do
with, but were nonetheless necessary for this to happen: Congratulations, you've
identified hazards!

You now have mitigation strategies for preventing situations like this from
happening again:

- Find ways to cope with irritability and frustration before it gets exposed to
  other people and potentially results in this.[^8]
- Talk to said friend about this particular topic, ask to avoid it, or to make
  it clear in a way that the same comment/situation does not repeat.
- A step further that comes with more effort and is only worth it if the topic
  has caused issues repeatedly: Sit down and figure out a way you can defuse it.
  Attend therapy, read books, etc.[^10]
- Cancel on your friend when you are feeling irritable and frustrated, as a last
  resort.

After this, you can "zoom out", and focus on the next level upwards. Why were
you frustrated? Is it a regular occurrence? What causes it? How can you get
better at dealing with it? Why did your friend poke at this specific thing? Has
it been a problem in the past? How is your relationship with this friend? And so
on. Each question will yield understanding over how you work and behave, and you
can learn about yourself and your own behaviours.

You should write down the questions you ask, and the answers you find in
someplace private. Being able to reference what has happened in the past is
invaluable to finding patterns, and you are indeed no exception to this. The
guiding principle is a gentle curiosity. How do things work, why do they work?
What has led them to be like this? There's no wrong answers here, merely
explanations for how things came to be, and maybe also how they work.

A tempting thought, at this point, is to feel terrible: You are to blame for
this situation! If you had just been different, this all could have been
avoided. And so, a note on blame, safety, and humans in complex systems.

## Systems Design and Operator Error

An early, wonderful line in _Engineering A Safer World_ (p. 39) is this:

> All human activity takes place within and is influenced by the environment,
> both physical and social, in which it takes place. It is, therefore, often
> very difficult to separate system design error from operator error: In highly
> automated systems, the operator is often at the mercy of the system design and
> operational procedures.

This has a few implications, but the big three are:

1. The environment around you shapes your actions to the degree that any active
   mistake made is mitigatable by changing your environment, and
2. Your actions are *well-reasoned* in your context and view on the world. This
   is called **local rationality**, for the information, context, values,
   priorities, conflicts that you have, your decisions represent what you
   believe to be the best choice.
3. That your decisions *are not to blame*.

To unpack this, let's think about the environment the standard operator that
Leveson is talking about. They're controlling a power plant, or some other
industrial process. They have to navigate controlling an extremely complex
system by their own mental models of this system, informed by the (necessarily
limited) feedback available to them, and can only affect change on this system
by some limited set of actions.

To dig out an old favourite of Safety Engineering nerds, let's talk about the
[Three Mile Island Accident][three-mile-island-wiki]. Many, many analyses, talks
and papers have been written about this, but to be usefully reductive about it,
it came down to a few factors: The sensor they were acting on did not indicate
what the operators thought it indicated (it merely indicated if the valve had
been supplied power, not that it actually had closed), the situation they found
themselves in was never covered in training procedures (but also looked a **lot**
like something they had been trained to *never* let happen), and the feedback
the system was giving them was, to them, contradictory. Their actions, of trying
to diagnose the problem, and their confusion over *whether there even was a
problem to begin with* is perfectly understandable from their contexts as the
event was unfolding.

To say that, in theory, there were other indicators of the situation that could
have led them to successfully avoid any problem whatsoever is a meaningless
counterfactual. You already know the outcome. You already know that
their actions resulted in this. When you know the outcome, you are subject to
Hindsight Bias, and you will criticise their actions far more intensely than you
ever would if you knew the outcome was positive.

To focus on their "faulty" actions, to cry "why didn't they just..." is to blame
the people involved, the people that acted to the best of their information,
skill and resources, is to want to remove the pain and horror you are feeling at
the accident having taken place, and to instead place it on the operators that
"did it wrong".

For the context of the operators, their information, situation and knowledge,
they behaved as rationally as they could. They did everything they could to make
sure nothing bad would happen. To go on and on about things that *did
not happen* is meaningless, and worse, harmful. The environment they existed in,
*the design of the system* led them to reach the conclusions they did about the
state of reality.

Blame, in general, only makes things worse. It's an understandable human
instinct: Blame exists to discharge pain, discomfort, guilt. There's a single
responsible person, and if we can blame them, that means that are aren't to
blame for this. We avoid the pain and discharge it to someone else instead.

But doing so does nothing to actually address the problem. If someone else is to
blame, and we definitely are not, then our actions haven't contributed to the
problem, and therefore there is no need to change our actions, our environment.
Blame *reduces* our chances to learn from what happened. This is how you end up
with some systems produces monthly occurrences of "unpreventable and tragic
instances of human error". Nothing about it was unpreventable, but to recognise
would mean to do away with the guilt-and-pain-discharging application of blame.

At the beginning of every investigation into an accident stands the decision of
whether we want to do what we can to reduce the chances of further accidents
happening, or if we want to find 'the guilty party' to discipline and 'hold
accountable'. One of those reduces the amount of harm inflicted on people, I
suggest that one.

So, having made that decision, let's talk about the thing we *can* actually do:
Trying to gather as much data to understand _how_ the accident came to be, and
then shaping our environment to prevent, mitigate, or lessen hazards that we
encounter. Because if "unpreventable and tragic human error" happens repeatedly,
the environment is the thing in common between those.

## Environment Design

Our environment is the world we exist in. It presents us events in a certain
way, to which we then react. We can change the ways in which events and facts
are presented to us, and therefore change our reaction.

You can see how this very minimal definition of "environment design" is both,
immensely powerful and absolutely unhelpful. It is general enough to encompass
all of human behaviour, and therefore gives you absolutely nothing you can apply.

It becomes useful when we see how this allows the shifting of attention and
planning from when we can afford to spare it (times of quiet and rest with
little demand on our facilities) to those when we can't (When we have problems
to solve, like when we are late, or need to think through a problem, or are
talking to people). If we can change the structure of events and facts presented
to us, we can change our behaviour without needing to worry about how we behave
in the moment itself, our environment will lead us to reach different
conclusions.

The main principle here is the direction of your *attention* when we are in the
process of doing things. We can think about ourselves in the situations where
our environment led to our attention being misdirected or lead down dead ends.
What are the things we need to see in the moment? How do we set up the
environment for seeing the information that should guide our decisionmaking and
*nothing else*?

For example, one of the simplest ways in which you can design your environment
to shift attention and consideration is locality: If you are prone to forgetting
your lunch, putting it next to the door to grab easily when you are rushing out
of the door makes you less prone to forgetting your lunch. Your attention is
being directed to the lunch at the time you most need it, before you leave your
apartment.

In these times, something else would be removing notifications from contexts and
situations when they only distract, in others, it would be adding notifications
for events. Getting an email when you haven't bought groceries in a week is
good systems design: Your attention is being redirected to your fridge being
almost empty, but ideally before it runs out. Setting up the sending of this
email is something that we can then do when we have spare resources to help us
when we don't.

This is also where the analyses come in, what went wrong, where? These point to
weaknesses in the environment setup, and these usually surprise is – our
planning, thoughtful self did not anticipate those things become problems.
That's both, perfectly okay, and completely expected. What we select for in calm
and quiet is never the same as what we select for when in the context of doing
things.

We don't fully control our environment, but we can influence it. One particular
failure mode I've run into with this model is, well, if I can setup my
environment to avoid this, this means that not doing so is my mistake yet again
and I've fucked it up, *again*. This is not helpful, and will just make you feel
worse. The environment is not totally under your control. But you can influence
it, carefully.

## The Cycle Of Error

Something to be aware of when you do actively influence your environment (and to
beware of) is what Dr. Cook called *The Cycle of Error*: A bad thing happens. We
look at the bad thing, and find that it was caused by a person misjudging
something, doing something wrong, missing something crucial in their evaluation.
In other words, "Human Error". Then we Fix This™. This is usually done via
process, by special-casing this somehow. We add an item to a checklist. We have
Fixed The Issue™.

But in doing so we've made the system more complex. There's now an additional
item to pay attention to. Because the fix was intended to fix one specific
issue, that's the only thing it has been evaluated against, while in many more
other circumstances it may now be a problem. Then, for a while, nothing
happens. We feel assured in our correction of the problem.

Then, one of the situations arises where the correction is actually in the
way. Either the person is able to cope with the increased complexity and is able
to disregard the correction when it is appropriate (which will go unrecognised,
since the correction happening has not resulted in anything visible), or the
correction causes a bad thing to happen, and we again, Fix This™. You can see
where this is going.

This is particularly pernicious in situations where it's people dealing with
people, and an edge case crops up. People (especially engineers are prone to
this) rush to fix the edge case with additional process, but the cost of the
additional complexity in process is so much higher than the problem it solves.
[Jacob Kaplan-Moss][jkm-story] recently made this point better than I would in
this paragraph.

## Economic pressures and depression

One of the many reasons as to why the world is so hard to deal with – I would
argue one of the central ones – is that complex systems are dynamic. They adapt
to the pressures they face. In abstract, big systems that are studied like this,
with formal incident reviews processes, people employed solely to evolve the
systems design, the pressures are economic: The system costs too much money, the
system doesn't produce enough, the system hurts too many people.[^6]

And so the system adapts. The people contained within find ways of adapting to
those pressures. They find ways to be safer, cheaper, faster. The system, first
of it all, optimises for its own continued existence. Everything else comes
second. The problem is that applying these pressures will produce consequences
that are usually not foreseen, or intended, by the parts that apply these
pressures. Pressuring a system to be cheaper will result in adaptations that
The Powers That Be would consider "cut corners".

The second part to this adaptation and complexity is the _Law Of Stretched
Systems_. In terms of the above, if you have a system with 'spare capacity',
i.e. a system that could produce more, then the pressure towards efficiency will
demand that production. And it will demand more, and more, until all of that
spare capacity is used up, and the system is just, just on the verge of being
too expensive, too slow, too dangerous. Now, any further capacity, any slack you
add to the system and don't have a means of defending with tooth and nail will
instantly be eaten up by this demand. After all, the factory owner asks himself,
why make less money?

All of these pressures persist when we apply this lens to a person's life
instead, trading some factors for others. Even if you do not suffer from mental
illness, you are still subject to these pressures. You still want to be happier,
healthier, wealthier. Some of them are worth calling out here, because of the
mechanism that underlies Stretched Systems.

Mental illnesses have a habit of being, well, not good for you. We'd like them
to not existing in our head. They are additional drains on your resources, they
make your system more expensive to run, or slower, or more unsafe, and honestly,
most do all three.

It may sound trivial to say, but if you are aware of having one of those
unwanted guests, _you have to account for them_. Planning as if they would not
be a thing will end up getting you in ways that make everything even worse,
afterwards.


## The Importance Of The "Measuring Channel"

The "Measuring Channel" is a bit of an abstract term that describes the flow of
data from the front lines, the sharp end, to the decision-makers and planners,
the blunt end. It's how you figure out that you are close to the boundaries that
you can operate in. All your decision-making lives and dies by the information
you get from this channel, you are blind to what's happening otherwise.

This also transfers. We have some measuring channel, we notice hunger and decide
to eat, we notice anger and vent it somewhere (ideally) safe, we notice desire
for something and buy it. Everyone has an information flow from the sharp end
(your body, emotions, active-doing-of-stuff practical self) to the blunt end
(the planning, project-managing logical self).

Sadly, mental illness has a habit of messing with this. We forget to eat, we
don't recognise our emotions and then do things we regret. The quality of our
measuring channel has degraded to the point where we can't make good decisions,
because the data we have does not reflect reality. For the data we have,
drinking a bottle of vodka is a rational choice. (c.f. local rationality from
above!)

But, you can improve that! And it's a smart investment, with high returns for
the effort expended. It works well because it helps us when we most need it, and
when we can least afford what is usually considered 'good advice'. Making a
spreadsheet, meditating and working out are indeed things that would improve our
state when we're at our worst. However, they are so far our of reach for being
actionable and usable advice that they border on insulting. When we can't cook
dinner for ourselves and sleep 3 hours per night, advice of "go to the gym"
produces, at absolute best, a tired laugh. But exactly that is where environment
design helps most, by helping us reach better outcomes without needing to expend
resources when we can least afford it. This is applicable regardless of
mental illness -- everyone has days where the prospect of Doing The Thing is of
comparable effort to climbing a mountain.

Write things down. Words don't (or rarely) change when you're looking away. Your
mental context may change, but the words you wrote in this context won't. This
helps you figure out the *how*, how you interact and influence your life. Being
able to refer to things you wrote down at the time of something unpleasant
happening is a sight into your brain at the time, something you usually don't
get. Take advantage of it, write things down.

"Getting in touch with yourself" is a (thankfully) popular thing to do, from
journaling to meditation to IFS. Personally, for me, journaling and meditation
work, but everyone is different here. Try out tools, see what helps you the
most. Just don't get stuck only looking at the tools. You're trying different
tools to solve problems you face, the effect is more important than the
tool.[^13]


## Why Would I Do This, A Coda

I'm aware this is an unusual angle to take for debugging your own life. I'm
aware it's oddly robotic, dehumanising and detached. It sees people, or
yourself, as a system that does what it does, not as a person. That is in fact,
why I recommend this to anyone suspecting their brain working similar to mine,
or finding some kind of resonance in these words and processes.

The detachment allowed me to avoid my own biases towards myself, I was able to
just treat myself as another person, a difficult task at times. The focus on
environmental factors helped me get out of the cycle of blaming myself, of
making myself feel worse when I already was unwell. We are but a part in the
system, and as such, we are subject to its influences. To deny our influences is
to deny our humanity, to disconnect us from other people. In consequence,
treating our actions as free from such influences is illogical and imports a lot
of pain you don't need to suffer.

I do actually recommend this process widely, by applying it to just 1-2 things
that have happened recently, you may be able to gain insight into things you
were not aware of previously. I hope it helps someone else as much as it did me.

---

[^1]: This is a fantastic book, and it's even accessible for free under [the
    Open Access programme][easw-pdf] from MIT Press. Read it, particularly Part
    I is some of the best writing on what it means to engineer I've seen.

[^2]: Caveat for the well-read reader: The field is a lot bigger than that, and
    in particular she seems to have a distinction between systems design and
    systems operation that most of the field does not seem to share. In that, my
    view on this may be limited.

[^6]: Well-read readers will recognise this as the boundaries in Rasmussen's
    Dynamic Safety model, which is usually the model of choice to demonstrate
    how systemic factors in dynamic systems combine to failures.

[^8]: While this requires an awareness of your emotions that you may not have to
    this degree, you can then also add the required hazard of "I was unaware I
    was frustrated and irritable", which instead has the mitigation strategy of
    finding ways to take more accurate stock of your emotions.

[^9]: Why this post? I have no other motivation, other than I could successfully
    adapt and apply quite a few techniques to my daily life, and I want to
    share. Between depression, recently-treated ADHD, and PTSD, life is not
    always the easiest, and I will take help from any corner I can.

[^10]: Please don't take this to mean that you are to blame for this reaction,
    or that it "shouldn't even be a problem", or that it's bad to be angry at
    what the topic. I mean this purely in the sense of, if you can find ways to
    avoid being annoyed, you end up less annoyed. For me, one of these cases was
    a direct trigger for my PTSD and I lashed out in consequence. Should I have
    been angry? Yes. But it also hurt people that did nothing to contribute to
    my pain, and hurting them did nothing to lessen my pain. Learning how to
    defuse that made my life better.

[^11]: Being outside comes with the small-but-present risk of being mauled by a
    bear, that doesn't mean that you shouldn't go outside, but it *also* doesn't
    mean that you should ignore the possibility of Surprise Bear.

[^12]: The frequently-ignored point about substance-based coping is that it
    *still (for the most part) achieves its main goal*, coping with the broader
    context in life. Coping is not a dirty word, it's how you deal with life.
    The these-days common derogatory use of "cope" and "copium" makes me sad, we
    all need to deal with the world in some form. Some of the coping is
    healthier than other forms of it, but all of it serves the purpose of
    dealing with the world. I just also consider it necessary to be aware of
    *how* you cope with the world, and to adjust it to avoid harm.

[^13]: Looking specifically at the people here who read about Luhmann's
    Zettelkasten and now have abandoned all original projects to focus solely on
    taking notes.

[easw-pdf]: https://direct.mit.edu/books/book/2908/Engineering-a-Safer-WorldSystems-Thinking-Applied
[three-mile-island-wiki]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Three_Mile_Island_accident
[jkm-story]: https://jacobian.org/2022/feb/14/that-wild-aam-story/
