---
layout: post
author: Mordecai
title: "Luhmann's Model Of Complexity, Selection Force, And Influence"
categories: post
---

_Note: This is the first of a couple of articles I'm planning to write about
this rough cluster of topics and themes, strongly influenced by Luhmann. For
those well-versed in Luhmann, I need to caution that I'm not by any means an
expert on Luhmann's work. These articles will primarily draw from his posthomous
publication **Macht Im System**[^7], as well as some papers and interviews._

Niklas Luhmann was a German sociologist, best known for two things: Being very
influential to sociology at large (notably not as much in the English-speaking
world, but Europe and Russia, his ideas came to the anglosphere later and more
slowly.) and, to be polite, making full use of the German language.[^1]

To me, some of his most interesting work and what I want to talk about here is
his model and conceptualisation of influence, selection, complexity and how
organisations fit into that. All models are wrong, including this one, but this
one is useful in providing insight into how complexity is managed across
organisations, how coping with complexity happens, and how decisions are
transferred and transformed.

Let's start bottom-up, and go from simpler and more elementary definitions and
relationships to more complex and emergent ones.

## What's A System?

Luhmann defines a system in a characteristically terse way, namely that "a
system is defined by its boundary between itself and the environment". This is
as broad of a definition as a useful one, a system in this notion is formed any
time someone tries to make a distinction between inside and outside. Inside the
system, the level of complexity is reduced compared to the outside, mostly by
means of agreements and influence (more on this below) as to what to do, and
what the priorities are. This can be as loose as "shared terminology", i.e. when
a group of experts agree to name a common object, and as specific as an
employment contract.

Systems are often loose and overlapping, and like in more classical systems
theory (referring here to Donella Meadows and Jay Forrester), the main use of
defining them is to define the unit of analysis.

Inside the system, the complexity of the world is reduced by there being
agreed-upon, shared definitions, goals and values, compared to outside of the
system, where they are not.

## What's Complexity?

Complexity, in Luhmann's model, is the amount of potential actions any one actor
could take at any one point. This generally is considered infinite outside of
the system, and the whole point of the system boundary is to define a space
where it is manageable, by reducing the amount of actions possible to a point
where it is possible to act.

This is generally done by agreements on goals, values, functions, delegation,
and so on: If we agree that I'm cooking dinner tonight, my potential actions for
what I'm doing this evening are now much smaller, and most of them should
include cooking dinner.

It's important here that complexity inside a system is *variable* and
*influenceable*, you can choose how complex the inside of your system is. You
can make it very simple and the next action is always very clear, the trade-off
is that it can't represent the environment/rest of the world very well, you have
disregarded many dimensions and aspects of the environment to get to your simple
system.[^3]

The reward for taking on more complexity is being closer aligned with the
environment and therefore being able to react to changes in the environment, the
reward for taking on less complexity is being able to decide on a reasoned
course of action.[^2]

To use an example: If I'm cooking dinner, I can choose to care or not care about
dietary preferences my guests have. Doing so increases complexity (Now if
vegetarians are present, I may need to cook a second main course), but reflects
the world better: some guests might still be vegetarian, no matter if I choose
to care about it, or not. Choosing to not care might lead me to being surprised
by the outcome of my actions, but it makes *choosing* that action easier.

## Why Do People Want To Reduce Complexity?

Because, in brief, they are bad at dealing with it. If you give someone a large
amount of potential options and ask them to pick the best one for them to do by
a reasoned process (i.e. not just picking one at random, based on aesthetics,
and so on), the amount of complexity they can successfully do that with is quite
low.

People can adapt to deal with this complexity, but the trade-off is time and
cognitive load. Adding complexity means that the process of deciding what to do
is slower, as people's intuition-based capabilty for making off-the-cuff
decisions is exceeded, and they have to use slower, more deliberate processes to
decide on just exactly what to do, much less actually doing it.

To illustrate further, consider asking someone that's a reasonably good cook to
cook dinner. They will most likely use a certain amount of assumptions (you two
are the two people eating, it will be one course, dietary preferences and
allergies are known, what they have in the fridge) to arrive at an answer for
what they are going to do to fulfill what they agreed to do, likely a
spontaneous outcome of mentally going through options and satisficing until a
result was found.

Now, insist the meal be three courses. The answer will take longer to arrive at,
and will now include acquiring additional information and external planning.
Additionally add that you invited 2-5 friends, but all of them are flaky and
may or may not come. Unless you have an extremely patient friend, it is at this
point that you will likely face a demand for additional constraints to make the
process of arriving at a workable and possible course of actions feasible.

## What's Selection Force/Selectivity? (*"Selektionskraft"*)

Luhmann dubs the compound force that reduces the infinite amount of choice in
the environment to an actionable amount the "selection force" (or
*Selektionskraft*), as in: It's the strength of the process of selection (of the
possible actions you could take) that can vary, and so the amount of complexity
you can deal with inside the system also varies.

A constraint on your actions increases the selection force, because a whole
dimension of complexity now has a fixed value. The space of possible solutions
just got smaller.

## How Is Selection Force Manipulated?

This is the point where Luhmann's model goes from an interesting framing of
complexity and systems to a model capable of generating new insights: Much of
all human behaviour manipulates selectivity in some form or shape, but most
of the time, interpersonal social dynamics are the chief way that is done.

Luhmann generalises this to the very specific and not-at-all overloaded term
*Influence*. Remember that in this model, all complexity and all selection force
is viewed from the point of a single agent. You can aggregate this to the
system level, but practically, the thresholds for what is actionable and what is
inactionable amounts of complexity happen on the agent level.

## What's influence?

Influence is therefore also seen on the agent level, as communication between
two people. One person can make sensible decisions over more dimensions of input
if another person processes some of them, makes partial or complete selections,
and then passes that on. The first person can then choose to either accept or
discard the selection performed by someone else. If they accept the decisions
made, Luhmann terms that to be accepting the influence of someone else.

This happens in a great many situations and circumstances. Most
straight-forward, your boss tells you to research something, you come back with
constraints. This is first your boss influencing you (by constraining your next
action), then you influencing your boss (by choosing what constraints to report
on, how to present them, etc).

Specifically, this happens *all the time* and is impossible to avoid. The
explanation and definition chosen by Luhmann is deliberately a very
nuts-and-bolts framing, applicable to basically all situations that involves at
least one person that has encountered another person at some point in their
life.

## Why Is This Model Useful?

By framing it around dimensions of input to a system and interpersonal
influence, actions are seen inside the system around the influence they create,
i.e., for whom they perform selection. The amorphous social phenomenon known as
power[^4] is a *generalisation* of influence, people with more power in a system
have others in the system accept their decisions and selections more often.
Computers can be said to have influence on agents by framing events, omitting or
including information, causing the agent to choose one action over another.

This definition of complexity also provides a quite simple answer to the "I
could build that in a weekend!"[^5] phenomenon programmers are prone to
experiencing, namely: Those companies often choose to accept substantially more
dimensions of input than those saying that can see, in choosing to accept that
complexity into the system, it now has to be accounted for and actions have to
be differentiated.

In general, it allows us to rephrase the question of "Why would they do that?"
to "Who are they accepting, or not accepting, decisions from, and for what
reason?" that accepts and builds on top of the local rationality principle[^6],
while also centering the social dynamics rather than events or facts.

Luhmann builds on this model significantly and to great insight in the realms of
power and generalisation of influence in ways that are also interesting. For
now, I will leave it at this model and framing of complexity, influence, and
systems.

---

[^1]: This is a not inconsiderable part of why he remained relatively unknown in
    the English-speaking world, his prose is extremely concise and very hard to
    translate without losing meaning. He was an incredibly prolific author with
    70 books and more than 400 articles, and (a small) part of how he was that
    prolific is not using a ton of words to make his points.

[^2]: A subsequent application of the Law Of Stretched Systems points towards
    systems always sitting right on the cusp of being paralyzed by complexity,
    and any increases in complexity-management being instantly eaten up by
    additional complexity being added to the system.

[^3]: This leads to a further Luhmann idea, the one of *differentiation*:
    Separating/recognising different objects as different in what they are, how
    they behave, and so on is the first step to treating them differently.
    Complexity in the world increases whenever someone differentiates one thing
    from another thing in some dimension, because now that difference has to be
    accounted for in behaviour.

[^4]: The actual subject of *Macht Im System* (literally translated, "Power In
    The System") for which this model is used as underpinning. More posts to
    come on that topic, nuts and bolts for now.

[^5]: The subject of a rather good essay by [Dan Luu][sounds-easy], about
    programmers wondering why some tech companies with simple products employ so
    many programmers.

[^6]: A longer definition with some actionable citations can be found
    [here][local-rationality], but it can be abbreviated to something as short
    as "people make decisions based on what they know and can see, which is not
    and can't be the whole of the system, leading them to make decisions that
    can seem nonsensical when seeing the whole of the system in hindsight".

[^7]: Luhmann, N. (2012, written est. 1960). Macht Im System. Suhrkamp.

[sounds-easy]: https://danluu.com/sounds-easy/
[local-rationality]: https://skybrary.aero/articles/local-rationality
